[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
[rock music]
- My name is Connor.
I've been bladesmithing
for almost four years.
And I'm from
Edison, New Jersey.
Edison is the town
where Thomas Edison
invented the light bulb.
Ta-da.
- My name's Brian Weaver.
Over the years,
I've dabbled in a few things.
I've been a jeweler,
a wood carver.
I do leather work.
I do metal sculptures,
bladesmithing.
I fence competitively
and have been a martial artist
and studied iaido.
- My name is Curtis Haaland.
I'm 21 years old.
I think that
I will do pretty well
going into this competition,
because a few years ago,
I started learning
from Burt Foster.
He's a Mastersmith
and "Forged in Fire" champion.
I've always loved knives.
I always have a big knife
hanging off the side
of my belt,
ready to use on,
you know, wood or a bear.
Just whip it out.
- My name is Marc Setzer,
I'm from Albany, Ohio,
and I'm 34 years old.
I have kind of a unique résumé.
I'm a full-time farrier,
part-time bus driver,
so I can deal with
high-stress situations.
I mean, have you ever driven
a bus full of kids?
- Bladesmiths,
welcome to the Forge.
♪ ♪
You're here
for three timed rounds
of edged weapon making
competition,
specifically designed
to test every aspect
of your capabilities,
all in front of our panel
of expert judges.
These are the men who decide
which of you will be
our next
"Forged in Fire" champion
and leave here with a check
for $10,000.
So let's meet them now.
Up first,
ABS Mastersmith J. Neilson.
Historic weapons re-creation
specialist David Baker.
Edged weapons specialist
Doug Marcaida.
[cymbal shimmering]
On your anvils is a cloth.
Go ahead and lift that up.
♪ ♪
That is a 3-inch-diameter
sphere
of 52-100 high-carbon
chromium steel.
- I'm nervous because
I've never used 52-100 steel,
and forging is
a very violent process,
so if you don't know
how it acts
during that type of pressure,
then anything could happen.
- Gentlemen,
your job in the first round
is to take
that steel ball bearing
and forge it into a signature
blade in your signature style.
Keep in mind
that in the second round,
you'll be attaching handles
to those blades
to turn them into
fully functional weapons.
They will then be tested
for strength and durability
in an antler chop.
And then we'll be testing them
for edge retention
in a leather bag slice.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
Your ten-minute design window
starts now.
While these bladesmiths
are designing these knives,
the idea is to design
for the test at hand.
- Well, we've seen what an
antler chop can do to a knife.
That can eat a knife up
like crazy.
- Well, they could work that
in doing a lighter knife.
- You don't need
to chop through it.
You just need to not
damage the blade.
- So by having less mass
in the blade,
you're really hitting
with a lot less force.
It's just not gonna affect
the knife nearly as much.
- Yeah, but I'm gonna try
and chop through the antler.
[laughter]
- That's true, yeah.
I kinda forgot the J. factor.
- The knife I'm gonna make
is a competition
chopper/bolo
with a slight recurve.
And I'm just gonna
keep it simple.
I like to make blades
that could be used
to either chop down a tree
or open up a beer bottle, so...
- My design is a camp knife.
It's big. It's a chopper.
I need something
that's gonna hold an edge
during that chopping test.
- Curtis is a pupil of a former
"Forged in Fire" champion.
Burt Foster.
- Yep.
- Doug, does the mentorship
matter in competition?
- Absolutely.
He should have one up,
because Burt's been in
this competition twice.
One of the best blades I ever
wielded was made by Burt.
- That was the Shotel,
correct?
Oh, man, I still remember
how beautiful that thing is.
- That thing just cut
through the air.
- The signature blade
that I'm drawing is a comp-B.
It means competition bowie.
I'm gonna steal this soapstone,
just 'cause.
I've had a nickname
for quite some time.
Condor.
Partially because
it rhymes with Connor,
but also because
it's a type of vulture
with a very long wingspan.
And, uh, well...
I've got very long arms.
Did anybody find
a loose pen cap?
Where's my pen cap?
- Is it in your mouth?
- No.
Is it in my hair?
- What I'm gonna make
is a loose interpretation
of a camp knife.
It's got a little bit
of a curve to it,
but it'll stand up
to the chop.
As far as my strategy goes...
[rock music]
Well, quite honestly,
I'd be bull[bleep] you
if I said I had a strategy.
Yeah.
- Your design period is closed.
Your three-hour forge time
starts... now.
[exciting music]
- That's a big ball bearing.
- You got 3 inches
of chromium steel.
It needs to be forged
at a high temperature.
- How much time
do you think these guys
are having to wait out
while their ball bearings
get hot?
- Oh, I'd give it
at least 15 minutes.
- At least 15 minutes?
- Yeah.
♪ ♪
- My strategy
is to immediately
get a handle welded on,
'cause ball bearings are not
easy to hold with tongs.
- I wanna see these guys
start boxing up these forges,
closing up these ends.
That way,
you can build up more heat
in those ball bearings faster.
- It's a waiting game
of patience.
- Heat for me!
♪ ♪
- The clock's ticking.
I gotta get
this big chunk of steel
in the forge
as fast as possible.
I wanna get to the billet
stage as fast as I can.
Half the battle is
getting that thing hot.
- Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
That's not hot enough.
♪ ♪
- So Marc needs to pay
attention to getting it hot.
Like, right now,
it's not moving.
- I've gotta figure out
how to get this chunk of steel
hot enough to move it.
- Look at his forge, it's open.
He's not blocking it up
all the way.
- Connor's got the whole
back end blocked off,
whereas Marc just took
one brick and stuck it inside,
so it's still that whole open
area around that firebrick.
- There's a lot of heat
escaping out of the back there.
- Yep.
♪ ♪
- Ball bearings,
they have to be heated up
all the way through,
like bright red, right?
- Oh, yeah,
you want it glowing.
- And we've seen before
where if you start
pounding on it,
and the cul-de-sac disappears,
that's where the stress
fractures come in.
- I'm thinking the rebar
is probably gonna melt
before the ball bearing
gets hot.
♪ ♪
This is a big ball
of very hard steel,
and you put something like that
into a forge,
it's gonna take a long time
to heat up.
And, I mean, let's face it,
I have a clock ticking away,
tapping you on the shoulder
every few seconds.
♪ ♪
- I've used this type
of power hammer before.
Burt Foster has one.
I feel very confident
that I can get a blade
very, very quickly.
- Curtis getting a long run
on Big Blue.
[machine press banging]
- I can dance to that tune.
[banging continues]
- You know, we're talking a lot
about this initial heat.
I think what's gonna
be really telling
is who keeps it working.
- What you really
don't wanna do
is work it till it's cold.
You wanna work it
till it starts losing color.
Doesn't drop temperature
too much.
Get it back in the forge
so it reheats quicker.
- It does have to be hot
for it to move efficiently
and for it to keep
from cracking.
A little bit more time.
- It looks like,
now that Curtis
has got his steel
a lot thinner,
he's picking up heat faster
and able to move the metal
more quickly.
♪ ♪
Connor has taken
that 3-inch ball bearing
and, in a little bit
over 30 minutes,
turned it into a billet.
- He's doing great work.
- I'd describe the speed
that I work at as normal.
[chuckles] But, of course,
that's because it's me.
- Connor just formed
the tip on his blade.
- I figured
that's what he was doing.
- I don't know
what he's doing right now.
- I haven't a clue.
- He's putting water...
on things.
He's blessing everything
in the Forge,
the blade, the vise.
- My blade is really hot,
so I like to splash water
onto the back of it
and watch it steam off.
But also I do it
partially for fun.
- In nomine Patris et Filii
et Spiritus Sancti.
♪ ♪
- Bladesmiths!
You have only two hours
remaining to finish your work!
- I'm worried about Marc.
- Yeah.
Marc's been pulling it out,
where it's still, like,
bright red but not yellow.
♪ ♪
[bleep].
It just seems like my forge
is burning a little--
not quite as hot as
maybe my forge at home
is used to.
Sometimes I'm swinging
a hammer on cold steel.
I really don't want that.
That's how you get cracks
and weak spots.
♪ ♪
[bleep].
Pressure really doesn't
bother me most of the time.
♪ ♪
[bleep].
It's bothering me now.
Can't get a good grip.
♪ ♪
- Things are starting
to get in a groove now.
The metal's
the thickness I need.
And I'm gonna go back
to my comfort zone,
where I'm working on the anvil
and moving the metal
how I'm used to moving.
- Brian's just moving
right along.
He's got his blade all shaped.
- Feeling pretty good about it.
I'm gonna establish
some finger welds
on the handle of the knife,
'cause I know one of the things
the judges look for
is how comfortable
it is in your hand.
♪ ♪
- My favorite shape right now
is Curtis.
He's got that nice upswept tip.
- It looks like he added
a little bit of
a recurve to it too.
- I've got the blade shaped
to where I need it to be.
I know I have enough time
to put holes in and quench.
♪ ♪
- Connor's starting to get
his blade back into the forge,
get it up to temperature
for the quench.
- The most important test in
consideration for this blade
is definitely the antler chop,
so I decided to do
an edge quench...
♪ ♪
And the reason why I do that
is because
it leaves the edge
really screamin' hard
but allows for a very soft
and cushioning body,
able to absorb impact.
Rather uneventful.
No fire, no explosions.
- Connor did the edge quench,
which was good,
but it was just maybe
a half an inch of that edge,
and it looked more red
than orange.
- Yeah.
- I've sort of kind of
ran out of things to do,
other than make it look pretty.
Whoa. [blows]
That was unexpected.
Might as well
just drill the holes.
- This is what I like to see.
I like to see a smith
setting themselves up
for round two.
- Yeah.
- I have a bit of an issue.
Clamping it into the vise,
it won't hold on straight,
so I decided to make
a bit of a spacer.
- Connor,
what are you doing with that?
- I'm making a spacer
for the vise.
- Out of our wire brush?
- Yeah.
It was brand-new.
I wanted to ruin it.
- There's some wood
right there, but whatever.
- Now the vise won't slip.
♪ ♪
- Thirty minutes, bladesmiths!
- I've got the basic shape.
Right now, it kinda looks like
a pregnant letter opener,
a really, really big
pregnant letter opener.
Geesh.
But I don't have
much time left.
I'm kinda upset
about the clock.
I think it's moving faster
than it should.
I need to get this quench done.
- You can make that blade
as big
and as thick as you want.
If there's a stress fracture
in there,
it's gonna break,
no matter what.
♪ ♪
- Whoa!
both: Oh!
- [bleep].
Uh...
I dropped my blade
into the quench tank.
- Oh, man.
- If my blade's at the bottom
of that tank in two pieces,
I'll be going home.
[tense music]
[met
- Oh, no.
- That oil's hot, and you don't
wanna burn your hands.
- Oof.
- I've gotta dive
elbow-deep into this hot oil
to try to find my blade.
- There it is.
- [laughs]
- I'm so glad
my blade is not in pieces.
- It's not hard.
- That does not sound
hard at all.
- [bleep].
I'm completely
and totally heartbroken.
It's gotta go back in the fire.
If I don't get
this heat treat right,
I'm done.
- We've got Curtis
getting ready to quench.
- This 52-100 steel
is new steel to me,
and I'm worried
because it could take
a little more heat
than I'm used to.
- Curtis in the quench.
- That's what I like to see.
[rock music]
- I'm happy with my quench.
I do a file test.
I know that this blade is hard.
You good, man.
♪ ♪
- And here goes Brian.
- And Brian's in.
- Brian's in the quench.
- Anything can go wrong
in the quench.
It's a hard steel,
we just moved it a bunch,
so this is make-or-break
right here.
You know, I'm keeping
my fingers crossed.
[bleep].
- How's it looking?
- I think I got a slight
little warp here at the end.
- Pretty tough steel, I think.
- Yeah.
If I can't get this warp out,
this could be game over.
- Ten! Nine!
Eight! Seven!
Six! Five!
Four! Three!
Two! One!
Bladesmiths, drop your tools,
shut down your machines.
This round is over.
- Now that I have
a finished blade, I feel great.
My blade might not be
the prettiest one out here...
Dang, that thing's ugly.
But it's hardened,
it fits all the parameters.
I think I've accomplished
my goals.
[cymbal shimmering]
- Bladesmiths,
in three short hours,
each of you has taken
a 3-inch-diameter sphere
of 52-100 ball bearing steel
and turned it into
a signature blade.
Now it's time for the judges
to take a closer look
at your work.
Connor, you're up first.
Please present your weapon
to the judges.
[tense music]
- Connor, I gotta say,
I was extremely impressed
with the way you worked.
You planned everything out.
You're very precise
on everything.
And it shows.
I mean, you've got
a very nice piece here.
My big concern was
during the heat treat.
I'm not sure if you got
your edge to temperature.
It's a bit softer
than it should be.
Could end up with
a very serrated edge
during the antler chop.
I would definitely recommend
redoing the heat treat.
- Brian, you're up next.
Please present your blade
to the judges.
♪ ♪
- Brian,
your steel looks great,
but the first thing
that catches my eye is this.
Now you got basically
a hand-and-a-half handle here.
And you've got...
a warp in the blade,
where your handle's
actually kicking out this way.
And they got a little bit
of a twist right in here,
so your blade
during the heat treat
actually moved in
two different directions.
- You're up, Curtis.
Please present your blade
to the judges.
♪ ♪
- Curtis, yeah, man.
[chuckles]
This looks like
a Jason Knight design,
something that can chop
and stab.
But that's a big handle
right there.
If you move forward,
you will have to address that,
because it's uncomfortable.
- Marc, you're up.
Please present your work
to the judges.
♪ ♪
- You know, generally, I like
the shape of this blade.
I would like to see it
more refined.
It's just, right now,
it's kinda unfinished
and very heavy.
- There's a lot of
steel here, man.
And you were having a hard time
heating up that steel,
and we can tell that
by all the lines
and stress fractures.
Those cracks are going
all the way through.
That's a problem.
[cymbal shimmering]
- Bladesmiths, the judges
have made their final decision.
The bladesmith leaving
the Forge is...
♪ ♪
Marc.
Your blade didn't make the cut.
J. Neilson's
gonna tell you why.
- You know, Marc,
the big thing is,
you didn't block up your forge.
You had a lot of airflow
going out the back, so...
You had a hard time
moving that steel,
and that took up
so much of the three hours,
you didn't have enough time
to refine that blade very much.
Between having
the least finished blade
and the stress fractures,
that's why we're
sending you home.
- Marc,
please surrender your blade.
- A little disappointed,
but I kinda saw it coming.
I wish the three remaining
smiths the best of luck.
I've got two little girls
and a beautiful wife
that are waiting
for me at home.
They're proud of me.
I'm still standing,
and I'm still smiling,
and they can't take that
away from me.
- Bladesmiths, congratulations,
you've made it to the second
round of this competition.
In this round,
you'll be attaching handles
to your blades
to turn them into
fully functional weapons.
They will then be tested
for strength and durability
in that antler chop...
and for edge retention
in a leather bag slice.
In this particular round,
you will only be allowed to use
all-natural materials:
Wood, antler, bone,
brass, and stainless steel
for guards and pins.
You'll have three hours
to do this.
Get ready,
because your time starts now.
[rock music]
Connor has already come away
with a block of natural wood.
- It looks like Cocobolo
or something.
- Cocobolo.
- The wood's a good choice.
We've got some
pretty wide handles.
A wide chunk of wood,
it's easier to find something
that'll fit your profile.
- I take the wood,
put it on the band saw,
and it's cutting very slowly,
but I just have to
muscle through it,
'cause it seems to be
the only tool on hand
that can really cut through
in a somewhat straight line.
- You can see him twisting
and turning that saw.
I mean,
he's all over the place.
It looks like
he's trying to force it.
♪ ♪
Curtis over here,
he's worked on his tang
a little bit,
trying to make it a little bit
more comfortable for our hands.
- I always leave my tang
a little bit big
so that I have enough room
to grind anything out of it.
I have three hours.
I feel very confident
that I can get everything done.
- That's Darth Curtis.
- Darth Curtis.
- [chuckles]
How are you doing, Curtis?
[modulated breathing]
[laughter]
♪ ♪
- First thing I have to do
is make that handle
a little bit more
reasonably sized.
The second thing is,
I have to try to fix
the warp in my blade.
- So, Brian heading over
to the welder.
He's removed the section
of his tang.
He kept the flare,
and he's gonna weld that flare
back on his tang.
- That's awesome.
- That's a brilliant move.
- With this kind of time,
I should be able to address
the judges' issues quickly,
which leaves me with a very
comfortable amount of time
to ply the handle,
make sure it's finished nicely
and fits nicely.
♪ ♪
- I got a feeling
that Connor's not
gonna do anything
about his blade.
- That's a big mistake
right there.
When you saw that we had
already an issue
with the hardness of his blade,
and we're gonna test it
on antlers?
That's the first thing
I'd go and fix.
- Take the rosebud,
heat that up,
roll it through the oil,
and it's done.
- Yep. Just take
the hot wrench to it...
- You bet.
- Nice and easy.
- I'm not gonna touch
the heat treat.
I don't want to re-harden it
and then have a blade
that's way too brittle.
♪ ♪
- It's very calm
in here right now.
Everybody's
really squared away.
They're really moving
at a steady pace.
- I'm not used to having
a relaxed atmosphere here.
- Yeah.
It's time to turn up the heat
in the Forge, what do you say?
- Sounds good.
- I agree.
- Bladesmiths!
One hour has elapsed!
You now have only
one hour remaining
to finish your work.
That's right, gentlemen.
We just dropped an hour
off the clock.
Get to it.
- Well, [bleep].
- The thing is,
it's not necessarily
that we've given them
a challenge physically.
It's that mental challenge.
Can they shift gears,
move into high gear,
and get it done nicely?
Or do they go into panic mode?
♪ ♪
- Right now,
I've got the slabs cut.
I've got the handle prepped,
all flat, ready to go,
and I need to start
shaping this handle.
- Brian over here,
he's set his pins in place,
his epoxy, and he's just
painting them over right now.
[rock music]
- Time kinda compresses
the strategy,
but, for me,
I'm not gonna change gears.
Quite honestly,
one of the reasons
I'm doing this
is to challenge myself.
I mean, this is why
we came here.
It's not, you know,
"Forged in Leisure."
♪ ♪
- The only one really who was
taking their time was Curtis.
He didn't work on his handle.
Now there he is.
- Every time I work,
I have steps in my head.
Now I have to figure out
a way to shift.
I need to cut these scales,
put holes in, get them shaped,
get the transition
from the ricasso to the handle
shaped so they're even.
I love pushing myself
to do things faster, better.
I'm always up for a challenge.
[cymbal shimmering]
♪ ♪
- I don't have much time.
This is really turning into
a mental challenge for me.
- This is an interesting
challenge to overcome.
I mean, to lose an hour
is a big deal.
- I got to completely
redo my plan,
so I basically cut out
all of the last hour
and condensed as much as I can
with the handle making.
My mind is racing
at about 1,000 miles an hour.
- The pressure's amped up
a little bit more.
- I've gotta get
this frickin' handle done.
♪ ♪
- So Curtis is mixing up
some five-minute epoxy.
♪ ♪
And that means he's ready
to put his scales on.
- I'm waiting on
the glue to dry,
but I don't have time
to watch glue dry.
I need to get stuff done.
- While Curtis's handle
is curing up,
he's sharpening his blade.
- That's not a bad idea.
- Yeah.
- I feel really good about it.
At this point, I can shape
a handle within ten minutes.
This challenge, it isn't
against me and a competitor.
It's against myself
and my own personal abilities.
♪ ♪
- Connor's handle is on.
He's sharpening his blade.
I am so thoroughly impressed.
Never have we taken time away.
And I don't think
we've ever had smiths
rise to the occasion
as a group,
like these three smiths has.
- I definitely planned
on having
three hours instead of two.
- [laughs]
Yeah.
Yeah, that was the first thing
that went wrong.
- Yeah.
- I've got the handle
to the point
where I'm comfortable with it.
I could do more,
but I've utilized
the two hours to the best
of my abilities,
and I'm happy with it.
- Ten! Nine!
Eight! Seven!
Six! Five!
Four! Three!
Two! One!
Bladesmiths, drop your tools,
stop what you're doing.
This round is over.
- Yeah! Bravo!
- [whistles]
- Good job, guys.
Good job, guys.
- Bravo!
- I'm extremely happy
with how the knife turned out.
I came into "Forged in Fire"
ready to face
whatever they threw at me.
I've done a knife
in five hours.
And now
it's in the judges' hands.
♪ ♪
- Bladesmiths,
welcome to our strength test.
This is the dreaded
antler chop.
I'm gonna take these beautiful
signature blades that you did,
and I'm gonna smash them
violently and repeatedly
into these extremely
dense antlers.
I don't really care what
your blades do to the antler.
I wanna see what the antler's
gonna do to your blades.
It's gonna be horrifying.
I'm gonna love it.
Connor, you're up first.
You ready?
- Yeah, go and try
and break it.
- Let's see
what we can do here.
[tense music]
- I addressed the issues
that the judges had
with my blade,
other than the heat treat.
If it's too brittle,
then I could be sending
a blade edge
into somebody's eye.
[exhaling rhythmically]
[rock music]
♪ ♪
Nice.
- [groans softly]
[cymbal shimmering]
All right, Connor,
we got a couple
of little problems here.
Big one for me
is this bird's beak
on the back end.
It's shaped down so much,
there's metal sticking out,
there's no wood
on the sides of it,
and it's ripping into my pinky.
But the big thing
is the chipping.
I mean, this is 4 inches
of area that's chipped out.
But it stayed straight.
It didn't bend,
and it didn't snap.
Good job.
- Thank you, sir.
- How you feeling, Brian?
- I'm feeling great.
- Cool. Ready to do this?
- Absolutely.
[tense music]
Antler is
a very hard material,
and after seeing
Connor's blade chip like that,
I'm quite nervous.
♪ ♪
[rock music]
[tense music]
- All right, Brian, obviously,
we've got chipping
and wrinkled edges here.
- Yep.
- So there is
a heat treat issue, okay?
- Okay.
- But it stayed true,
and it didn't break.
- Good.
- Good job.
- Thank you. Appreciate it.
- Curtis, you ready?
- Go ahead.
- Don't act so excited.
♪ ♪
Antler is a very,
very hard material.
It may chip the edge.
It may completely destroy it.
Here we go.
♪ ♪
[rock music]
- [exhales]
[dramatic music]
- J. stops, and...
I'm really nervous
about my blade now.
There's definitely
something wrong.
[ - Four more.
♪ ♪
[steel resounding]
[solemn music]
♪ ♪
All right, Curtis,
the first thing I wanna say is,
you made a beautiful handle.
- Thank you.
- There's just enough in here
to fill the palm, an index.
I knew where that edge was
every swing.
So fantastic job on that.
- Thank you.
- But we definitely
had an issue
in round one
with the heat treating,
and, I mean, you can tell.
You've got
your forge scale here,
which hides
the stress fracture there.
So, the blade is very brittle.
It just breaks my heart
when stuff like this happens.
- Yeah.
[tense music]
- Well, Curtis, it seems
a flaw from the first round
has thwarted your efforts
here in this competition.
We can no longer
test your blade
due to a catastrophic
blade failure,
and for that reason,
I have to ask you
to please leave The Forge.
[solemn music]
- Very, very disappointed
that I couldn't move on,
but I'm very proud
of the fact that
I was able to complete
my blade in five hours.
I really challenged
myself here.
The ball bearing,
it was made at 52-100 steel.
I've never used that before,
so it's really tough.
But I really didn't
expect it to break.
♪ ♪
I'll go see Marc.
[chuckles]
♪ ♪
- Connor, Brian,
congratulations,
you guys have made it to
the final round of
this competition.
Now all you need to do is
go back to your home forges
and re-create an iconic weapon
from history.
That weapon is...
[dramatic music]
The kilij.
- Ah. Okay.
- Originating
in the Ottoman Empire,
the kilij was
one of the region's
most recognizable
and dominant sabers.
Featuring a unique design,
its single-edged blade curves
to a double-edged tip,
creating a hefty
forward weight
that increases
the momentum of the swing,
enhancing its cutting power.
Not only an unparalleled
slasher,
its subtle curve also made it
a powerful thruster,
penetrating deep into an enemy
to produce brutal
and fatal wounds.
The weapon dominated
battlefields for centuries
until it was
eventually replaced
by more Western-type sabers,
such as the Mameluke sword,
which featured a longer,
narrower, less curved design.
♪ ♪
The blade must fall within
the following parameters:
The length of the blade
from the tip to the guard
must be between
28 and 30 inches.
The width of the blade
at the guard
must be no less than
an inch and three quarters.
Your blade must have a yelman
that flares wider
than the rest of the blade
and is double-edged.
And your crossguard
must include langets.
- Uh, that's a big-ass
curved blade.
I've never produced
something so curved
or finished something so long.
- Bladesmiths, you'll have
five days at your home forge
to complete this challenge.
At the end of five days,
you'll return
and present your blades
to our panel of expert judges.
And only after
they've thoroughly tested
those weapons
will they declare one of you
the "Forged in Fire" champion,
who also leaves here
with a check for $10,000.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
We'll see you in five days.
- Good luck, man.
- Yeah.
[rock music]
Being back home,
I'm definitely
a little bit more comfortable.
I've never finished a blade
as large as a kilij.
♪ ♪
For day one, my plan is
to get this whole blade
forged out.
Doesn't need to be pretty.
It just needs
to get the job done.
♪ ♪
Actually, that is
just straight-up twisted.
♪ ♪
If you see it happening,
just straighten it immediately.
♪ ♪
Give it some straightening
on the anvil,
and then I'm gonna move
to curving it.
All of this bending,
straightening
could be adding up
stresses into my blade.
[German accent]
"And if it is not up to snuff,
they do not a-help,
not at all."
I am absolutely exhausted.
I'm just gonna go ahead
and call it a day.
♪ ♪
- I'm here back at my forge
in Jamesville, New York.
♪ ♪
I don't have a power hammer
or a press.
I'm gonna be just
spending a lot of time
with the hammer and the anvil.
♪ ♪
There we go.
I wanna get it blocked out
and get it to shape
by the end of the day.
♪ ♪
It's just not really going
how I had hoped.
Had a chance
to get the steel hot,
and I'm moving it,
but it's a lot of work
to move it quarter of an inch.
Change of plans:
I'm gonna use
a different kinda steel.
I'm losing
a little bit of time,
but I have to get
a new piece of steel.
Hopefully it works
a little bit better.
♪ ♪
- Day two, I'll just be
working on grinding the blade
and getting it ready
for heat treat.
♪ ♪
Perfect!
Now it's time to quench.
[tense music]
[mumbling]
♪ ♪
Oh...
[blows]
Looks relatively straight.
♪ ♪
Wait.
Hasn't hardened really at all.
I need to quench
this blade again.
♪ ♪
[muttering]
I'm getting a bit frustrated...
Nope, not satisfied.
...that it hasn't hardened.
Multiple quenches could cause
fractures or warps.
I definitely don't want
to start over again.
Quenching!
Ah! Thank God!
This blade is hard.
Hoo-whee!
Three quenches, three,
before I got
the right temperature.
♪ ♪
I should know better.
I really should know better.
[rock music]
- The steel's here.
I decided to switch over
to the 1070.
It's a lot closer to
the width that I need,
and it's gonna take
a lot less forge time.
I'm ready to rock.
I feel like I'm playing
catchup a little bit.
By the end of today,
I need to have a shaped blade
pretty well profiled
and maybe quenchable
by tomorrow.
It's not heating up
very quickly,
but I feel a lot better
than I did yesterday,
that's for sure.
While I think
it was a bit risky
to kinda switch gears
with the steels,
I think I made
the right decision.
Heat treat tomorrow, for sure.
♪ ♪
- It's day four, and I have
to work on the handle.
♪ ♪
That went super smoothly.
This handle won't fit
underneath the langet,
so I need to carve
a channel out,
so that way it will just slide
straight underneath.
♪ ♪
Yay, it fits.
Everything is tight.
I can move on
to shaping the handle.
♪ ♪
In the knife making round,
my handle was
a little uncomfortable
in J. Neilson's hand,
so I really wanna
make something
that's very comfortable
for him to hold.
♪ ♪
Ugh. That's aggravating.
It's just way too square,
and I really have
no good way of fixing it,
'cause the langets
are what set
the maximum thickness.
I'm just gonna
have to accept it.
I just hope it doesn't
come back to bite me.
[sighs]
♪ ♪
- Today, I'm gonna start out
with the handle.
I've picked out the wood.
I've got to make sure it fits
comfortably in the hand.
And the other
major component of this
is fitting the langet
into the handle itself.
♪ ♪
Everything's kinda
roughed out.
So far, so good.
If both of our weapons
are kind of similar,
in terms of the testing,
I believe I've got
a bit of an advantage
in terms of how it looks.
Doug should be happy
when he's swinging it.
[tense music]
- Connor, Brian,
welcome back to The Forge.
You've had five days
at your home forge
to work on your finale weapons.
Connor, how did it go for you?
- It was
an interesting process.
♪ ♪
Forged it from
a nice, big chunk of W2.
Copper guard,
the walnut handle.
I think it's gonna be,
uh, pretty nice.
- Brian,
how did things go for you?
- I started out a little shaky,
never making a sword before,
but I'm super happy with it.
Uh, put a little bit
of engraving,
a lacewood handle.
- All right, gentlemen,
your weapons will now be put
through a series
of three tests:
a strength test,
a sharpness test,
and, up first, the kill test.
Doug?
♪ ♪
- Welcome to
our kilij kill test.
- [chuckles]
- To see what kinda lethal
damage your weapon will do,
I will take your kilij
and deliver killing blows
to this large side of beef.
Let's see how deadly
your weapons are.
- [exhales]
- Connor, you're up first.
You ready?
- I don't know.
Let's do it anyways.
- Let's do this.
- I'm excited to see
Doug attack this carcass.
My only real concern is
how Doug feels
about the handle,
'cause if it's
not comfortable,
then it's not a good blade.
♪ ♪
[rock music]
Nice.
[tense music]
[exhales]
- Connor, your blade is sharp.
This lacerates deep into
that meat carcass.
One issue I had a little bit
was with the handle.
On the first impact,
I felt it rotate,
so I had to adjust with it.
But this, sir, will kill.
- Thank you, sir.
- Brian, you're up next.
You ready?
- Absolutely. Let's go.
- Let's do this.
♪ ♪
[rock music]
- Nice.
- Sweet.
both: Yeah.
[tense music]
- First off the bat,
that's a sharp blade.
It's so curved over here
with the balance being forward,
allows for a slicing action
that digs in
and continues to cut
as I'm drawing the blade.
The handle feels good
in the hand,
to where I can index
and tell where it is
cutting all the time.
It will kill.
- Nice. Excellent. Thank you.
- Next up, the strength test.
J-minator?
- Okay.
- This is gonna be fun.
- [laughs]
- Here we go.
- Tons of fun.
- As you see,
we've got some nice,
sturdy oak barrels over here,
so what I'm gonna do is take
your finely crafted weapons
and bash them repeatedly
into these barrels.
Now, what the blades do
to the barrel
doesn't really matter.
What matters is what the barrel
does to your blade.
Connor, you're up.
You ready?
- Uh, sure, let's do this.
♪ ♪
[sighs]
- [grunting]
[rock music]
♪ ♪
[tense music]
- [exhales]
♪ ♪
- Ooh...
- [chuckles]
- Connor, we got
a couple problems here.
Your blade torqued out...
to one side.
- [sighs]
- The other concern I have
is your handle.
My hand is numb.
There was so much shock
coming through here,
and your handle tapers
from front to back,
so any time I'm swinging,
my pinky is slamming
into the back end.
- Yes, sir.
- Brian, how you feeling?
You ready?
- Oh, great.
I feel great.
- Feel great? All right.
- Let's do it.
- Let's go for it.
- All right.
- The sarcasm is overwhelming.
- After watching
J. beat on Connor's blade,
if I walk away
from this unscathed,
it's gonna be a miracle.
You may as well be bashing
your blades into steel.
Something's gonna happen.
[tense music]
- [grunts]
♪ ♪
- Oh...
[tense music]
♪ ♪
- All right, Brian.
You got a little bit of
a wavy highway here.
- A little bit.
- Striking here,
the whole blade
just kinda twisted around.
You're not gonna be
stabbing straight
with this thing anymore.
On the plus side,
your edge is still razor sharp.
- Thanks.
♪ ♪
- Gentlemen, your blades
have made it through
the strength test,
but with some damage.
So, to test that edge,
I'll be cutting through
this carpet.
Now, a sharp blade
should give us clean cuts.
A dull blade,
we'll see snagging
or tearing on that carpet.
Connor, you're up first.
Are you ready?
- Yeah, let's do it.
There's a bend in my blade,
so I'm super worried
about it cutting
through this rug.
I do know that there can be
some heavy resins
and other stuff
in these carpets.
[exhales]
[rock music]
♪ ♪
[tense music]
- All right, Connor,
what I like about your blade
is its ability to cut.
Passed right through
the carpet.
Very clean cuts.
But the biggest problem
is your handle.
The way it's wide at
the top here is uncomfortable.
It forces my hand
into a certain position,
and it would be nice to have
a bit more of an option.
Brian, you're up.
Are you ready?
- I am. Let's do it.
[muffled rock music builds]
♪ ♪
[cymbal shimmers]
[tense music]
♪ ♪
- All right, Brian,
your blade is really sharp.
It's held its edge beautifully.
But that bend in it
caught it right here,
and it just rolled
and slid off the carpet.
♪ ♪
- Bladesmiths, you've both done
some amazing work,
but the judges' deliberation
is complete,
and they've chosen our next
"Forged in Fire" champion,
and that champion is...
[dramatic music]
Connor, congratulations,
you are our new
"Forged in Fire" champion.
Brian, your blade
didn't make the cut.
- You know, Brian,
I love what you built for us,
but your blade took
so much damage
during the strength test
that it wasn't able to perform
as well in the sharpness test,
and that's why
we're sending you home.
- Understood. Thank you.
- Brian, please surrender
your blade.
♪ ♪
- It was close,
but at the end of the day,
I'm super proud of what I did.
Did some things that
I had never done before,
and I did them fairly well.
When I get home, I'll probably
take a day to clear my head,
but then it's full steam ahead
to the regular work.
♪ ♪
- Connor, congratulations,
you are our newest
"Forged in Fire" champion,
and that is a title that comes
with a check for $10,000.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- Present your blade
to the judges.
- I don't know what I feel.
Everything is numb.
Good news is,
I am "Forged in Fire" champion,
and I just won $10,000.
The bad news is,
I told all of my family
that I'd cut my hair if I won
and donate it to charity,
so this, uh, is gonna be,
you know, cut down
nice and short.
♪ ♪
[metallic clang]